NCBI Bookshelf. A service of the National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health. Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology [Internet]. 4th edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; 2022.  Sneha Sudha Komath, Morihisa Fujita, Gerald W Hart, Michael AJ Ferguson, and Taroh Kinoshita. AuthorsSneha Sudha Komath, Morihisa Fujita, Gerald W Hart, Michael AJ Ferguson, and Taroh Kinoshita1. V. Side chain modifications of the GPI anchor in mammals, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, and Trypanosoma View in own window  Mammals    S. cerevisiae     Trypanosoma   Side chain GalNAc modification PGAP4, 403 AA, 3 TM, GPI-GalNAc transferase Note: PGAP4 transfers β1-4GalNAc to the Man-1. It is a unique Golgi-localized glycosyltransferase with 3 TM domains. Side chain Man-5 modification A Man α1,3 (5%) or a Man α1,2 (15%) is added to Man-4 in roughly 20% of yeast GPI-APs. The former is added in cis-Golgi and the latter in trans-Golgi. Note: The mannosyltransferases involved have not yet been identified. Side chain Man-4 modification A Man α1,2 is also added to Man-3 of some proteins in several Trypanosoma and Plasmodium species by Gpi10/PIG-B (which is also responsible for addition of Man-3). Side chain β3GlcNAc modification TbGT8: 377 AA, 1 TM, β1-3GlcNAc transferase Note: Involved in branched poly-LacNAc synthesis. Side chain β6GlcNAc modification TbGT10: 384 AA, 1 TM, UDP-GlcNAc: βGal β1-6 GlcNAc-transferase Note: Elaborates the side chain in procyclin form by adding a β1-6GlcNAc branch at βGal. Side chain Gal modification B3GALT4, 378 AA, 1 TM, GPI-Gal transferase Note: B3GALT4 is a GM1 synthase, but is also involved in addition of β1-3Gal to the GalNAc on GPI side-chain. Presence of lactosylceramide on membrane enhances the GPI-galactosylation mediated by B3GALT4. Side chain Gal modification TbGT3: 377 AA, 1 TM, UDP-Gal: β-GlcNAc-GPI β1-3Gal transferase Note: Adds a Gal residue to the nonreducing-terminal GlcNAc residue. Side chain Sia modification The galactose is further modified by a sialic acid with α2-3 linkage. Note: The sialyltransferase has not been identified yet. Side chain Sia modification Trypanosomes do not biosynthesize sialic acid. They use trans-sialidases to transfer host sialic acids to their own GPI anchors. Note: TbTS and TbSA C2 are two such trans-sialidases identified.