NCBI Bookshelf. A service of the National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health. Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology [Internet]. 4th edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; 2022.  Sneha Sudha Komath, Morihisa Fujita, Gerald W Hart, Michael AJ Ferguson, and Taroh Kinoshita. AuthorsSneha Sudha Komath, Morihisa Fujita, Gerald W Hart, Michael AJ Ferguson, and Taroh Kinoshita1.    Chemical and enzymatic reactions of glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchors. Phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C (PI-PLC) releases the lipid portion of the GPI anchor and generates a myo-inositol-1,2-cyclic phosphate group that is part of the cross-reacting determinant (CRD) epitope. This reaction is blocked if the myo-inositol ring is acylated at C-2. Nitrous acid deamination of the GlcN residue releases the phosphatidylinositol (PI) component for mass spectrometric analysis. Nitrous acid deamination also converts the GlcN residue to 2,5-anhydromannitol (AHM) that can be radiolabeled by sodium borotritide reduction or fluorescently labeled by reductive amination with 2-aminobenzamide (2-AB). Following dephosphorylation with cold aqueous hydrogen fluoride (HF), the labeled glycans can be conveniently sequenced with exoglycosidases. Cold aqueous HF dephosphorylation followed by permethylation produces a positively charged permethylated GPI glycan amenable to tandem mass spectrometry. ES-MS-MS, electrospray tandem mass spectrometry; HPLC, high-performance liquid chromatography; TLC, thin-layer chromatography. The presence of GPI-APs in cell lysates may be inferred indirectly by the following methods. 1) Treatment with PI-PLC: GPI-APs that are acylated at C-2 of inositol are not sensitive to PI-PLC and cannot be identified by this method. Other GPI-APs, when treated with PI-PLC, lose the lipid portion of the GPI anchor (as shown in the scheme above). This results in a) GPI-APs becoming soluble in aqueous buffers and shifting from the pellet to the supernatant fraction. b) GPI-APs partitioning into the aqueous phase from the detergent-rich phase when the enzyme treatment is followed by Triton X-114 (a nonionic detergent) phase separation. c) the appearance of an epitope known as the “cross-reacting determinant,” which can be detected by specific antibodies. 2) Treatment with GPI-PLD: All GPI-APs are sensitive to serum GPI-phospholipase D (GPI-PLD) treatment, which releases the phospholipid portion of the GPI anchors. Treatment with GPI-PLD a) generally requires detergent solubilization of the substrate and does not generate a “cross-reacting determinant”. b) could leave one fatty acid attached to the protein, depending on the inositol-acylation status of the GPI-AP, and prevent complete Triton X-114 phase separation. 3) Metabolic labeling with [3H]myo-inositol: Since PI modification is only present as part of the GPI anchor in proteins, metabolic labeling of cells with [3H]myo-inositol will result in the radiolabel being incorporated only into GPI-APs, which can then be detected with high sensitivity. 4) Detection with fluorescently labeled aerolysin (FLAER): Certain pore-forming bacterial toxins such as aerolysin have been shown to bind to GPI anchors, and these may be used to detect GPI-APs directly on cell surfaces or to probe one- and two-dimensional gel western blots.