NCBI Bookshelf. A service of the National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health. Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, et al., editors. Essentials of Glycobiology [Internet]. 4th edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; 2022.  doi: 10.1101/glycobiology.4e.48 Richard D. Cummings, Marilyn Etzler, Michael G. Hahn, Alan Darvill, Kamil Godula, Robert J. Woods, and Lara K. Mahal. Antibodies, lectins, microbial adhesins, viral agglutinins, and other proteins with carbohydrate-binding modules (CBMs), collectively termed glycan-recognizing probes (GRPs), are widely used in glycan analysis because their specificities enable them to discriminate among a diverse variety of glycan structures. The native multivalency of many of these molecules promotes high-affinity avidity binding to the glycans and cell surfaces containing those glycans. This chapter describes the variety of commonly used GRPs, the types of analyses to which they may be applied, and cautionary principles that affect their optimal use. The first evidence that glycans were antigenic arose from the discovery of the human blood group ABO antigens (Chapter 14). A key tool in these studies were plant lectins that by the mid-1940s had found widespread use in typing blood. These lectins are relatively specific for blood types and they can be easily purified and are stable (Chapter 31). The discovery of the blood groups and the antibodies and lectins binding them indicated that such proteins could also be generally useful in identifying specific glycan sequences. Hundreds of different plant and animal lectins and other proteins with CBMs have now been characterized. Thus, although monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) are often more specific for glycan determinants and bind with higher affinity, many plant and animal lectins and CBMs also have useful specificities for determinants beyond monosaccharides, have cloned sequences, are usually less expensive and commercially available, and have well-characterized binding specificities. GBPs are also found in many other organisms (Chapters 31, 36, and 37), and reagents from these organisms are currently in use in the field. The availability of GBPs and mAbs has helped to catapult the field of glycobiology into the modern era. Many of the lectins currently used as tools in glycobiology originate from plants, but some also come from animals (e.g., snails) or mushrooms. Most were characterized initially by hapten inhibition assays, in which monosaccharides, their derivatives, or small oligosaccharides block binding to cells or other glycan-coated targets. Such small-sized molecules that compete with binding of a lectin or antibody to a larger ligand are termed haptens. Lectins are often grouped by specificity depending on the monosaccharide(s) that can inhibit their binding at millimolar concentrations and their distinct preference for α- or β-anomers of the sugar. However, lectins within a particular specificity group may also differ in their affinities for different glycans. The binding affinity (Kd) of lectins for complex glycans is often in the range of 1–10 µm, but for monosaccharides the affinity may be in the millimolar range. For complex glycoconjugates with multiple determinants or multivalency, the binding avidity of lectins may approach nanomolar values. For example, concanavalin A (ConA) is an α-mannose/α-glucose-binding lectin that recognizes N-glycans and is not known to bind common O-glycans on animal cell glycoproteins. However, it binds oligomannose-type N-glycans with much higher affinity than complex-type biantennary N-glycans, and it does not recognize more highly branched complex-type N-glycans (Figure 48.1). Other lectins, such as L-phytohemagglutinin (L-PHA) and E-PHA from Phaseolus vulgaris, as well as lentil lectin (LCA) from Lens culinaris, also recognize specific determinants of N-glycans. Some animal lectins that are widely used include those from invertebrates, such as Helix pomatia agglutinin (HPA) from the snail. In fact, these lectins and others are frequently used to explore structural features of glycans on glycoproteins, glycolipids, and cells (Figures 48.2, 48.3, and 48.4 and Chapters 31 and 32). Our understanding of lectins and use of them as reagents has been improving because of the creation of recombinant lectins, including engineered varieties discussed below, and the increased definition of lectin specificity enabled by glycan microarrays and other techniques (Chapter 29). Examples of N-glycans recognized by concanavalin A (ConA) from Canavalia ensiformis and Galanthus nivalis agglutinin (GNA). The determinants required for binding are indicated in the boxed areas. Hapten sugars that can competitively inhibit binding of (more...) Examples of types of N-glycans recognized by L-PHA, E-PHA, and DSA. The determinants required for binding are indicated in the boxed areas. Hapten sugars that can competitively inhibit binding of the lectin to the indicated glycans are shown on the right (more...) Examples of types of glycan determinants bound with high affinity by different plant and animal lectins. The determinants required for binding are indicated in the boxed areas. Hapten sugars that can competitively inhibit binding of the lectin to the (more...) Examples of types of glycan determinants bound with high affinity by different plant lectins. The determinants required for binding are indicated in the boxed areas. Hapten sugars that can competitively inhibit binding of the lectin to the indicated glycans (more...) A number of mAbs have been generated against specific glycan determinants. Several approaches to obtain these antibodies have been described. In addition, there is an emerging technology using phage display to identify single-chain variable fragments (scFvs) of antibodies that can also bind to glycan antigens. However, in many cases, it is difficult to define the specific epitopes recognized by these antibodies because isolated glycans are often characterized by microheterogeneities and related glycan antigens for comparison are often unavailable. Recently developed approaches, such as glycan microarrays and related techniques, combined with advances in the chemical synthesis of glycans, are helping to better define the specificities of mAbs (Chapter 29). Examples of different mammalian glycan antigens recognized by specific monoclonal antibodies. The antigens have the structures shown within the boxed area and are named as indicated. Usually, the antigen shown in the box can be linked to almost any glycan (more...) Additional examples of different mammalian glycan antigens recognized by specific monoclonal antibodies. The antigens have the structures shown within the boxed area and are named as indicated. In some cases, the importance of the reducing terminal end (more...) Antiglycan antibodies are widely used in glycobiology, and some common mammalian antigens they recognize are shown in Figures 48.5 and 48.6. Many of the murine mAbs to glycan antigens are of the IgM isotype. However, if the animal is well-immunized and serum titers are high, IgGs are frequently generated (e.g., ∼35% of the plant-glycan-directed mAbs are IgG). The higher valency of IgM antibodies that form pentamers or hexamers can affect the binding specificity. Some antibodies to glycan antigens are commercially available, whereas others are obtainable only from individual laboratories or stock centers. Some antibodies against mammalian antigens are shown in Figures 48.5 and 48.6, and they recognize terminal glycan determinants, although subterminal sequences may also be required for binding and or in some cases may decrease binding. Many of the antibodies generated to date against plant glycans recognize internal structural features of these polysaccharides. Several antibodies against the plant cell wall homogalacturonans or xylans bind to internal backbone residues, frequently with varying sensitivities as to the level of backbone substitution by either glycan or nonglycan substituents. In some cases, the length of the unsubstituted backbone that is recognized by an antibody varies, thereby allowing the antibodies to be used to identify variations in backbone substitution density. In addition, the context of expression (free glycan vs. glycoprotein vs. glycolipid) or the class of glycan (N- vs. O-linked) may play a significant role in determining specificity and affinity. For example, antibodies to the 6-sulfo-SLex antigen require the fucose, sialic acid, and GlcNAc-6-O-sulfate residues. In contrast, the MECA-79 antibody recognizes extended core-1 O-glycans that contain internal GlcNAc-6-O-sulfate residues; it does not require either the fucose or sialic acid for recognition, but it does require the core-1 O-glycan. There are also many mAbs that recognize different glycolipids and glycosaminoglycans. With the growing understanding of the principles of glycan recognition (Chapter 29), there have been several novel glycan-detection reagents reported based on engineering mutant forms of endogenous lectins (engineered lectin) or carbohydrate-processing enzymes. Recombinant and engineered proteins can offer advantages over lectins or antibodies. They may be expressed, often in Escherichia coli, as opposed to being isolated from plant, fungal, or animal sources. Expression reduces batch variations that may result from isolation and offers a scalable solution to the demand for reagents. With protein engineering being based on the ever-increasing number of crystal structures of oligosaccharide-protein complexes, the structural origin of the specificity of an engineered protein may be well-understood. This stands in contrast to the case of antibodies that may be specific, but are rarely analyzed crystallographically, and thus the molecular origin of their specificity often remains unknown. For this reason, it is challenging to predict or interpret antibody specificity or cross-reactivity between glycans. In recent years, there has been increased interest in recombinant lectins derived from bacterial adhesins (e.g., “Siglec-like” binding regions [SLBRs] from Streptococcus mutans) and engineered lectins with altered specificities. Another avenue of new reagents has been the conversion of enzymes into reagents for detecting substrates. The concept was demonstrated more than 40 years ago, with anhydrotrypsin serving as an early example. In the specific case of glycan-binding reagents derived from inactivated glycosylhydrolases or other enzymes, the specificity is conferred by the endogenous enzyme, which is often well known. Inactivation—for example, by point mutation of the catalytic nucleophile—generally leads to a protein that retains the desired specificity and may still retain sufficient affinity to be useful as a detection reagent. As an example, an inactivated bacteriophage-derived endosialidase has been shown to have lectin-like properties and can be used as a probe in the specific detection of its substrate, polysialic acid. More often, however, the inactivated enzyme requires additional engineering to amplify its affinity and/or improve its selectivity/specificity for the glycan substrate of interest. Thus, the development of structure-based protein engineering promises a new avenue to generate glycan-detection reagents with complementary and sometimes preferable features to those offered by traditional lectins and antibodies. Some of the important uses of lectins, CBMs, and antibodies are illustrated in Figure 48.7. Antibodies, lectins, and CBMs each have distinct advantages. Lectins are usually less expensive than antibodies and are often naturally available in seeds and plant materials. The genes encoding many CBMs have been cloned, enabling facile heterologous expression to obtain needed quantities of the protein. However, antibodies, lectins, and CBMs are often needed to bind a wide variety of glycan determinants. For example, no plant lectins specific for the SLea or the Lex antigens have been identified, whereas mAbs to these antigens are available. Conversely, no mAbs have been identified that bind general determinants, such as α2-6-linked sialic acid and core fucose, whereas lectins have this discriminating ability (e.g., Sambucus nigra agglutinin [SNA] and L. culinaris [LcH], respectively). Of course, many GRPs recognize determinants independently of their presentation—that is, the same epitope may be presented on multiple types of glycans (e.g., O-glycans, N-glycans, or glycolipids). Although available antibodies thus far cannot distinguish common N-glycan structural motifs, such features are well-recognized by some plant lectins. For example, the plant lectin ConA does not bind mucin-type O-glycans in animal cells, but binds only to some specific classes of N-glycans (Figure 48.1). Additionally, E-PHA binds “bisected” complex-type N-glycans (Figure 48.2) and does not bind known glycolipids or O-glycans. Great care should be taken, however, to use lectins and antibodies at appropriate concentrations in which their specificity can be exploited. Examples of different uses of plant and animal lectins, carbohydrate-binding molecules (CBMs), and antibodies in glycobiology. Many plant and animal lectins are multivalent as shown, and antibodies are always multivalent, whereas CBMs are monovalent. (more...) The glycan determinants bound with highest affinity by each of these probes have been identified by a combination of approaches, including affinity chromatography, glycan synthesis, and binding to specific glycoconjugates, cells, and glycan microarrays. A good example of this is the L-PHA, which is often used by immunologists as a mitogen to stimulate quiescent T cells to divide. L-PHA originates from the red kidney bean Phaseolus vulgaris, which also contains isolectins to L-PHA—notably E-PHA. L-PHA binds to certain branched, complex-type N-glycans containing the pentasaccharide sequence Galβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-2(Galβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-6)Manα1-R (the so-called “2-6-branch”), as shown in the boxed portion of the glycan in Figure 48.2. Curiously, the only monosaccharide that effectively inhibits either L-PHA or E-PHA is GalNAc, although this monosaccharide is not part of the N-glycan determinants recognized by these lectins (Figure 48.2). The binding of L-PHA is used to identify specific types of branched N-glycans in cells. L-PHA binding is dramatically decreased in mice genetically null for the branching β1-6 N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase (MGAT5 and -5B) (Chapter 9). The expression of L- or E-PHA-binding glycoproteins is increased in many tumor cells (Chapter 47). Similar studies show E-PHA binds bisected complex-type N-glycans containing the GlcNAcβ1-4Man-R in the core, and such structures are produced by MGAT3, and E-PHA-binding glycans are also elevated in some tumor cells. Thus, using a variety of lectins and antibodies, it is possible to deduce many aspects of glycan structures. Microarrays in which a variety of lectins and antibodies are printed on a slide can also give valuable information about the glycosylation status of cells and glycoconjugates. This approach is especially sensitive in regard to defining whether biological samples differ in glycosylation. For example, such microarrays have been used to identify glycosylation differences in melanoma metastasis, leading to the identification of core fucose as a critical determinant of metastatic potential. There are several approaches to using antibodies and lectins in glycan purification, including affinity chromatography or affinity binding and immunoprecipitation or lectin-induced precipitation. The proteins may be covalently coupled to a carrier such as Sepharose or biotinylated and captured on streptavidin-Sepharose. In addition, antibodies may be noncovalently captured on protein A (or G)-Sepharose. These bound antibodies and lectins can then be used to isolate glycoconjugates expressing specific glycan determinants. ConA-Sepharose is commonly used to isolate glycoproteins as it shows little binding to nonglycosylated proteins. However, it does not bind all glycoproteins because it recognizes specific N-glycan structures. ConA-Sepharose has also been used to isolate free oligo- and polymannose-, hybrid-, and complex-type biantennary N-glycans. When combined in a serial format, multiple lectins can be used in affinity chromatography to isolate glycoconjugates containing most of the major glycan structures present in animal cells, with glycoconjugates being separated as classes that share common determinants. An example of serial lectin affinity chromatography is shown in Figure 48.8. Identification of glycoproteins through analysis of released glycopeptides gives important information on proteins carrying specific modifications. Release of glycans coupled with ion-exchange chromatography and high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) can yield highly pure glycans with predicted structures that can then be confirmed by mass spectrometry of native and permethylated derivatives (Chapters 50 and 51). An example of the use of different immobilized plant lectins in serial lectin affinity chromatography of complex mixtures of glycopeptides. In this example, a mixture of glycopeptides is applied to a column of immobilized concanavalin A (ConA), and the (more...) Mixed-bed lectin chromatography using a combination of different immobilized lectins is useful for simultaneously separating all types of glycoconjugates from nonglycosylated material (e.g., glycopeptides from peptides). Combinations of affinity chromatography and other chromatographic techniques can be very useful in identifying and separating glycopeptides. Thus, the ability of glycans to be recognized by lectins dependent on specific structural features in the glycans is a powerful tool for glycan identification and isolation. In some approaches, the glycans are tagged at the reducing end by fluorophores and radioisotopes or may be obtained by metabolic radiolabeling from cells or tissues grown in the presence of radiolabeled sugar precursors, such as [2-3H]mannose or [6-3H]glucosamine. Glycan fractionation shown on immobilized lectins in Figure 48.8 is currently not possible with antibodies because no antibodies are known that can distinguish such core structural features in glycans. When intact glycoproteins or complex polysaccharides (e.g., those found in plant cell walls [Chapter 24]) are analyzed for their interactions with plant lectins or antibodies, the interpretation of data may be complicated by the multivalency of the glycoprotein/polysaccharide and the density of the immobilized lectin/antibody. For example, glycoproteins containing multiple high-mannose-type N-glycans bind so tightly to immobilized ConA that it is difficult to elute the bound glycoprotein, even with extremely high concentrations of hapten and under harsh conditions. Lower densities of ConA conjugation reduce its avidity for the glycoproteins and promote hapten dissociation of bound ligands with lower concentrations of sugars. When used in combination, multiple lectins, such as ConA, AAL (Aleuria aurantia lectin), LCA, and RCA (Ricinus communis agglutinin), can be used to isolate most glycoproteins containing N-and O-glycans from animal cells. This is a potentially powerful approach for glycoproteomics, or the identification of glycoproteins and their glycosylation status. Another approach to enhance glycoproteomic analyses is to use multiple lectins in mixed-bed or multi-lectin affinity chromatography (M-LAC). In such an approach a number of different lectins are used that recognize different glycan features, such as those shown in earlier figures in this chapter. Glycoproteins (or glycopeptides) with these selected features can be isolated and enriched from complex mixtures, allowing for more focused analyses on the glycoconjugates of interest. In addition, in some types of analyses a genetic disruption can result in the collapse of classes of glycans to a single structure, allowing a lectin-enrichment strategy to be particularly useful in identifying the glycomic features of interest. For example, deletion of the gene Cosmc (C1GalT1C1) in cell lines leads to the collapse of GalNAc-type O-glycans, which can vary immensely in structure, to a single structure, the Tn antigen (GalNAcα1-O-Ser/Thr). These derived cell lines are termed SimpleCells. If glycopeptides are prepared from such cells, all glycopeptides that contain an O-glycan with the Tn antigen can be affinity purified using immobilized Vicia villosa agglutinin (VVA). The isolated glycopeptides can then be sequence-identified. In this type of approach the O-glycoproteome of cells regarding sites of O-GalNAc-type O-glycosylation can be more readily characterized, as there is no universal set of reagents that can generally recognize all the different types of O-glycans in normal cell-derived glycoproteins. Lectins and antibodies can also be used in western blotting approaches to characterize protein and lipid glycosylation, in which biotinylated lectin or antibody probes are applied to material transferred to nitrocellulose or other supports after electrophoresis or chromatography. The bound lectins/antibodies are visualized by binding streptavidin-alkaline phosphatase and conversion of luminescent substrates. In these approaches, the concentrations of lectins and antibodies used must be low enough both to reduce false-positive, nonspecific binding and to allow for inhibition by appropriate haptens to confirm sugar binding. Removal of N-glycans by PNGaseF, or of sialic acid by neuraminidase, can eliminate binding to specific lectins and antibodies in western blotting, thus indicating the lectin/antibody-bound determinant. Mention should also be made about the approaches to isolate novel lectins from natural sources, or even when made recombinantly or in the form of some type of GRP. Historically, such isolation methods have used affinity chromatography. For example, a high density of lactose linked to agarose in the form of an affinity column can be used to isolate galectins, which can be eluted with lactose as a hapten. The cation-dependent mannose 6-phosphate receptor (CD-MPR) was isolated by affinity chromatography on immobilized yeast mannans containing phosphorylated mannose. There are also other forms of isolation, including salt precipitation, ion exchange chromatography, gel filtration, and the capture of a tagged and recombinant chimeric-lectin by capture of the tag (e.g., His tag). A recent method exploits a “capture and release” approach, in which multivalent ligands recognized by a lectin are assembled, whereby they can capture the lectin of interest, and then filtration or centrifugation may be used to isolate the lectin complexed with ligand. The lectin can then be dissociated and is available for study. Any of these type of methods are also useful when combined with proteomic analyses in identifying novel lectins and protein complexes that bind to glycans. The classic approaches for using antibodies, CBMs, and lectins to characterize cell-surface glycoconjugates are histochemistry (lectins) and immunohistochemistry (antibodies), flow cytometry with cell sorting, and cell agglutination. In histochemistry and immunohistochemistry, tissues are prepared and fixed as usual for histological staining, and then incubated with appropriate biotinylated or peroxidase-labeled lectins or antibodies (glycolipids are extracted during standard paraffin embedding procedures and require frozen sections for sensitive detection). The bound lectins, CBMs, or antibodies are then visualized by means of secondary reagents, such as streptavidin-peroxidase or labeled secondary antibody. These approaches often yield information that is difficult to obtain by any other approach. For example, they can reveal the spatial orientation of different glycans, their relative abundance, and whether they are intracellular and/or extracellular. Three important controls in such studies are (1) use of lectins, CBMs, or antibodies at limiting concentrations to avoid nonspecific binding; (2) confirmation of the specificity of binding by appropriate inhibition by haptens or by destruction of the predicted target glycans with glycosidases; and (3) use of multiple lectins, CBMs, or antibodies to provide further confirmation of the conclusions. Lectins and antibodies to glycans have also been widely used in flow cytometry and cell sorting. In such studies, cells are incubated with low, nonagglutinating levels of lectins or antibodies that are biotinylated and conjugated to fluorescently labeled streptavidin or directly fluorescently labeled. Cells with bound lectins or antibodies can then be identified by their fluorescence in the flow cytometer, and the degree of fluorescence can be correlated with the number of binding sites. A key consideration in flow cytometry is to avoid high concentrations of lectins or antibodies that cause agglutination of cells. Lectins and antibodies can also be used to identify specific membrane localization of different glycans, using confocal microscopy and electron microscopy. Lectins and antibodies are useful for characterizing cell-surface glycans when limited numbers of cells are available. Studies on glycosylation of embryonic stem cells have been greatly aided by using panels of specific lectins to identify unique glycan determinants and changes in their expression during cellular differentiation. A recent variation of this approach is to use a microarray of immobilized lectins, which are probed with fluorescently labeled glycoproteins in extracts of cells. Such assays can reveal minor differences in protein glycosylation between different samples and give insight into the glycan structures that are present. One of the oldest uses of lectins is in the agglutination and precipitation of glycoconjugates, cells, and membrane vesicle preparations. The easiest assay for many soluble lectins that are multivalent is agglutination of target cells, such as erythrocytes, leukocytes, or even bacteria or fungi. Agglutination can often be easily observed without a microscope, but it is also measurable in instruments such as aggregometers. In these assays, a lectin solution is serially diluted and the reciprocal of the final dilution that gives measurable cell agglutination is taken to define the activity. Bacterial agglutination by plant and animal lectins is often used to explore the surface glycocalyx and changes in glycocalyx on culture conditions and to define phenotypes of different strains or serotypes. Lectin precipitation and aggregation can be used to define the glycan composition and overall architecture of polysaccharides, as has been done for bacterial, algal, plant, and animal polysaccharides. Combining many different GRP, including lectins and antibodies, into a lectin microarray is another way in which the glycome of cells may be explored. Such arrays have dozens of specific proteins immobilized in a microarray format and can provide valuable information about the glycosylation status of cells and glycoconjugates. Fluorescent-tagged glycoproteins from a source (e.g., cell or tissue extracts) can be applied to these arrays and the binding pattern compared to a control sample can reveal features of the glycome of the material, such as patterns of sialylation, fucosylation, and even linkages of residues with glycans using linkage-specific reagents. The advantages of this approach is the microscale in which it can be performed, the relatively high-throughput nature of the technology, and the precision of discrimination in terms of differential glycosylation between two samples. The system is particularly adaptable to include new reagents as they become available (e.g., new lectins or engineered proteins). An important use of lectins and antibodies has been in the selection of cell lines (e.g., Chinese hamster ovary [CHO] cells) that express altered cell-surface glycans. The common lectins that have been used are ConA, WGA (wheat germ agglutinin), L-PHA, LCA, PSA (Pisum sativum agglutinin), E-PHA, ricin, modeccin, and abrin. The latter three lectins are heterodimeric, disulfide-bonded proteins that are classified as type-II ribosome-inactivating proteins; they contain an A subunit that constitutes an enzyme called RNA-N-glycosidase, which inactivates the 28S ribosome, and a B subunit that is a galactose-binding lectin (Chapter 31). Other plant lectins such as ConA, WGA, or LCA (which lack an enzymatic or toxic A subunit) are still toxic to animal cells via poorly understood mechanisms, whereas yet others, such as soybean agglutinin (SBA) and peanut agglutinin (PNA), are not highly toxic to animal cells in culture. One mechanism of toxicity of plant lectins is the induction of apoptosis, perhaps by blocking receptor or nutrient transport functions in cells, or by cross-linking apoptotic receptors. Noncytotoxic lectins and antibodies to specific glycans can be rendered toxic by conjugation to ricin A subunit or other toxic proteins. Using such agents, both loss-of-function (e.g., loss of a glycosyl-transferase or glycosidase) and gain-of-function (e.g., activation of a latent transferase gene) mutants have been obtained. More details about glycosylation mutants of cultured cells are presented in Chapter 49. The specificity of lectins and antibodies to particular glycans has made them especially useful in cloning genes encoding glycosyltransferases or other proteins required for proper glycosylation, such as nucleotide sugar transporters. For example, CHO cells and the African green monkey kidney cell line COS lack glycans with terminal α-galactose residues. Consequently, the cells do not bind the plant lectin GSI-B4 (Figure 48.3). When transfected with a cDNA library prepared from cells that do express terminal α-galactose residues (such as murine teratocarcinoma cells F9), cells that have taken up a plasmid encoding the cognate α1-3 galactosyltransferase and express terminal α-residues bind to GSI-B4 and can be identified with plates coated with the lectin. Isolation of plasmids from the bound cells and repeated recloning and reexpression by this technique (called expression cloning) led to the identification of a specific gene encoding the murine α1-3 galactosyltransferase (Ggta1). Similar approaches using an antibody to the Lewis x antigen (SSEA-1) led to cloning of the Lewis blood group Fuct-III. Related approaches using antibodies and lectins to other glycan structures and wild-type CHO cells and CHO mutants led to the identification of the genes encoding many other glycosyltransferases, including some involved in extending glycosphingolipids and nucleotide sugar transporters, such as the transporter for CMP-NeuAc. Such approaches based on lectin selection are also useful with yeast. For example, the gene encoding a yeast N-acetyl-glucosaminyltransferase (GlcNAcT) was identified by expression cloning using a GlcNAcT-deficient yeast. The mannan chains of the yeast Kluyveromyces lactis normally contain some terminal N-acetylglucosamine residues that are bound by the plant lectin GSL-II, which binds terminal N-acetylglucosamine residues (Figure 48.4). A mutant lacking the GlcNAcT and lacking terminal N-acetylglucosamine residues on mannoproteins was identified. Transformation of yeast with DNA containing the gene encoding the GlcNAcT led to yeast clones that were bound by the fluorescently labeled GSL-II. This strategy was used to identify the gene encoding the GlcNAcT. The transporters for UDP-Gal in Leishmania parasites and in the plant Arabidopsis were also identified by expression cloning in Lec8 CHO cells; these cells have a mutation in their endogenous UDP-Gal transporter, and consequently lack galactose-containing glycans on their surface. For the UDP-Gal transporter from Arabidopsis, Lec8 cells were cotransfected with a cDNA library encoding the putative Arabidopsis UDP-Gal transporter, along with a glucuronosyltransferase that can lead to synthesis of the unsulfated version of the HNK epitope (Figure 48.6), GlcAβ1-3Galβ-R that is bound by a specific antibody. This identification strategy led to the expression cloning of several UDP-Gal transporters from Arabidopsis. CHO and COS cell lines have also been useful in characterizing the activities of novel glycosyltransferase genes that were identified by other approaches. For example, candidate fucosyltransferase genes encoding α1-2 or α1-3 fucosyltransferases have been expressed in CHO and COS cells, which lack these enzymes. Expression of these enzymes then leads to surface expression of antigens recognized by specific antibodies and lectins, such as the H-antigen (for the α1-2 FucT) or Lex and SLex (for the α1-3 FucT). Lectins and antibodies to glycan antigens have been useful in assaying specific glycosyltransferases and glycosidases in various formats (Figure 48.7). Immobilized lectins have been used to isolate products of glycosyltransferase assays, such as chitin polysaccharides on WGA or glycosylated peptides on mixed-bed lectin columns. α1-3 Fucosyltransferases that synthesize the Lex and SLex antigens have been assayed based on capture of the product on immobilized antibodies to these antigens or binding of antibody to the immobilized fucosylated product in an ELISA-type format, or in flow cytometry using beads containing the acceptor glycan that is modified by an enzyme to a new structure recognized by an antibody or lectin. Likewise, α2-3 sialyltransferases and α2-6 sialyltransferases have been assayed using immobilized acceptors in an ELISA-type format and in BIAcore formats (Chapter 29), and their products have been measured with MAL (which binds to the α2-3-sialylated product) or SNA (which binds to the α2-6-sialylated product). Similarly, α1-3 galactosyltransferases have been assayed using immobilized acceptors in an ELISA-type format, and the product has been measured with GSI-B4 or Viscum album agglutinin, which binds to the α1-3 galactosylated product. The glycoprotein-specific β1-4 N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase has been assayed using glycoprotein acceptors in solution, capture by a specific mAb in a microtiter plate, and measurement of product by an ELISA-type assay with a Wisteria floribunda agglutinin (WFA) that binds to terminal β1-4-linked GalNAc residues generated by the enzyme. Conversely, glycosidases can be assayed by measuring the gain or loss in binding of lectins or antibodies. For example, the lectin PNA, which binds to nonsialylated Galβ1-3GalNAcα1-Ser/Thr in O-glycans, can be used to measure bacterial sialidases by agglutination of treated erythrocytes. Many microbial hydrolases have evolved to attack their substrates in structurally complex contexts (e.g., plant cell walls [Chapter 24]). The number and diversity of glycan-directed probes now allows the detailed characterization of such enzymes acting on biologically relevant structures, yielding new insights into their activities. It is easy to envision other ways in which lectins, CBMs, and antibodies can be used to probe the products of specific glycosidases and glycosyltransferases, given the specificities of the glycan-directed probes described here.